.\" COPYRIGHT AND PERMISSION NOTICE
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1999 J.H.M. Dassen (Ray) <jdassen@wi.LeidenUniv.nl>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are 
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a 
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
.\" into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
.\" except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
.\" by the Free Software Foundation, Inc. <URL:http://www.fsf.org>
.\"
.\" END COPYRIGHT AND PERMISSION NOTICE
.\"
.\" If you make modified versions of this manual, please notify the current 
.\" maintainers of the package you received this manual from and make your
.\" modified versions available to them.
.\"
.TH FOO 1 "JANUARY 1999" LSH "Lsh Manuals"
.SH NAME
foo \- frobnicate the bar library
.SH DISCLAIMER
LSH IS WORK IN PROGRESS. DON'T EXPECT THE CURRENT VERSION TO WORK, AND
.B "*DON'T*"
EXPECT IT TO PROVIDE ANY SECURITY WHATSOEVER.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B foo [-bar] [-c
.I config-file
.B ]
.I file
.B ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B foo
frobnicates the bar library by tweaking internal
symbol tables. By default it parses all baz segments
and rearranges them in reverse order by time for the
.BR xyzzy (1)
linker to find them. The symdef entry is then compressed
using the WBG (Whiz-Bang-Gizmo) algorithm.
All files are processed in the order specified.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -b
Do not write `busy' to stdout while processing.
.IP "-c config-file"
Use the alternate system wide
.I config-file
instead of
.IR /etc/foo.conf .
This overrides any
.B FOOCONF
environment variable.
.IP -a
In addition to the baz segments, also parse the
blurfl headers.
.IP -r
Recursive mode. Operates as fast as lightning
at the expense of a megabyte of virtual memory.
.SH FILES
.I /etc/foo.conf
.RS
The system wide configuration file. See
.BR foo (5)
for further details.
.RE
.I ~/.foorc
.RS
Per user configuration file. See
.BR foo (5)
for further details.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP FOOCONF
If non-null the full pathname for an alternate system wide
.IR foo.conf .
Overridden by the
.B -c
option.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The following diagnostics may be issued on stderr:

Bad magic number.
.RS
The input file does not look like an archive file.
.RE
Old style baz segments.
.RS
.B foo
can only handle new style baz segments. COBOL
object libraries are not supported in this version.
.SH BUGS
The command name should have been chosen more carefully
to reflect its purpose.
.SH COPYING
The lsh suite of programs is distributed under the GNU General Public
License; see the COPYING and AUTHORS files in the source distribution for
details.
.SH AUTHOR
This man-page was written by J.H.M. Dassen (Ray) <jdassen@wi.LeidenUniv.nl>.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR bar (1),
.BR foo (5),
.BR xyzzy (1)

