.\" COPYRIGHT AND PERMISSION NOTICE
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1999 J.H.M. Dassen (Ray) <jdassen@wi.LeidenUniv.nl>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are 
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a 
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
.\" into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
.\" except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
.\" by the Free Software Foundation, Inc. <URL:http://www.fsf.org>
.\"
.\" END COPYRIGHT AND PERMISSION NOTICE
.\"
.\" If you make modified versions of this manual, please notify the current 
.\" maintainers of the package you received this manual from and make your
.\" modified versions available to them.
.\"
.TH lsh 1 "JANUARY 1999" LSH "Lsh Manuals"
.SH NAME
lshd \- secsh server
.SH DISCLAIMER
LSH IS WORK IN PROGRESS. DON'T EXPECT THE CURRENT VERSION TO WORK, AND
.B "*DON'T*"
EXPECT IT TO PROVIDE ANY SECURITY WHATSOEVER.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is a placeholder man-page; as the configuration mechanism of lshd is
still fluid, it's not very useful to document lsh already.

lshd is a server for the
.BR secsh (5)
protocol.
.SH OPTIONS
.SH FILES
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH BUGS
.SH COPYING
The lsh suite of programs is distributed under the GNU General Public
License; see the COPYING and AUTHORS files in the source distribution for
details.
.SH AUTHOR
This man-page was written by J.H.M. Dassen (Ray) <jdassen@wi.LeidenUniv.nl>.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR lsh (1),
.BR lsh_keygen (1),
.BR lsh_writekey (1)
.BR secsh (5)
